:title: Musculoskeletal Loss and Exercise Countermeasures for Space Flight
:speaker: Prof. Alan R. Hargens
:speaker_title: Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery
:date: 2017-05-18
:location: Bainer Hall Room 1062
:image: hargens.jpg
:organization: School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego
:org_website: http://som.ucsd.edu
:personal_website: http://bones.ucsd.edu

During spaceflight astronauts experience musculoskeletal losses and moderate to
severe lumbar pain. There is also a significant incidence of herniated
intervertebral disc (IVD) in astronauts, especially in the first year after
return to Earth. The pathogenesis of back pain during and after spaceflight is
currently unknown. Our current investigation aims to understand this higher
incidence of herniated IVDs and back pain. Studies incorporate pre- and
post-flight imaging, functional tests, and pain questionnaires of International
Space Station (ISS) crew members to ascertain mechanisms of back pain as well
as degeneration and injury to spinal structures. Presently six out of 12 ISS
crew members have completed all pre- and post-flight testing. Preliminary
results to date document: 1) decreased functional back-muscle extensor test
(Biering-SÃ¸rensen test time), 2) decreased cervical and lumbar muscle
functional cross-sectional areas with partial recovery by R+45 (only 21% in
neck), 3) increased spine stiffness in flexion, 4) increased spine
straightening, 5) decreased quality of vertebral bodies (anterior wedging and
endplate irregularities), 6) variable water content changes and 7) no
significant changes to disc height and lumbar length. Our results for
morphological, biochemical, metabolic, and fluoroscopic kinematics of the spine
may aid development of countermeasures to reduce back pain and decrease the
incidence of herniated IVDs post-flight. Countermeasures proposed in-flight
should include integrated cardiovascular and musculoskeletal exercises to
reproduce normal, daily Earth-like stresses. Our long-term objectives are to:
1) promote crew health and well-being inflight, 2) optimize post-flight
rehabilitation and translate our findings for Earth Benefit. Supported by NASA
grants NNX10AM18G and NNX13AM89G.

Biography
=========

Dr. Hargens is Professor and Director of the Orthopaedic Clinical Physiology
Lab at the UCSD. He previously served as Chief of the Space Physiology Branch
and Space Station Project Scientist at NASA Ames RC and as Consulting Professor
of Human Biology at Stanford Univ. He teaches orthopaedic residents,
medical/graduate/undergraduate students at UCSD. His recent research concerns
gravity effects on the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal systems of humans and
animals. One of his students spent 6 months on the ISS, grew and ate vegetables
in space, while another flew on the Shuttle five times and was the first
astronaut to climb to the top of Mt Everest. Dr. Hargens also investigates
exercise devices to maintain astronaut health and performance in space. This
research is translated to help post-surgical treatment and rehabilitation of
orthopaedic patients, and to improve performance of athletes.
